## Interfaces, requests, and events

The Wayland protocol works by issuing *requests* and *events* that act on
*objects*. Each object has an *interface* which defines what requests and events
are possible, and the *signature* of each. Let's consider an example interface:
`wl_surface`.

### Requests

A surface is a box of pixels that can be displayed on-screen. It's one of the
primitives we build things like application windows out of. One of its
*requests*, sent from the client to the server, is "damage", which the client
uses to indicate that some part of the surface has changed and needs to be
redrawn. Here's an annotated example of a "damage" message on the wire (in
hexadecimal):

    0000000A    Object ID (10)
    00180002    Message length (24) and request opcode (2)
    00000000    X coordinate (int): 0
    00000000    Y coordinate (int): 0
    00000100    Width        (int): 256
    00000100    Height       (int): 256

This is a snippet of a session &mdash; the surface was allocated earlier and 
assigned an ID of 10. When the server receives this message, it looks up the 
object with ID 10 and finds that it's a `wl_surface` instance. Knowing this, 
it looks up the signature for the request with opcode 2. It then knows to expect 
four integers as the arguments, and it can decode the message and dispatch it 
for processing internally.

### Events

The server can also send messages back to the client &mdash; events. One event
that the server can send regarding a `wl_surface` is "enter", which it sends
when that surface is being displayed on a specific output (the client might
respond to this, for example, by adjusting its scale factor for a HiDPI
display). Here's an example of such a message:

    0000000A    Object ID (10)
    000C0000    Message length (12) and event opcode (0)
    00000005    Output (object ID): 5

This message references another object, by its ID: the `wl_output` object which
the surface is being shown on. The client receives this and dances to a similar
tune as the server did. It looks up object 10, associates it with the
`wl_surface` interface, and looks up the signature of the event corresponding to
opcode 0. It decodes the rest of the message accordingly, looking up the
`wl_output` with ID 5 as well, then dispatches it for processing internally.

### Interfaces

The interfaces which define the list of requests and events, the opcodes
associated with each, and the signatures with which you can decode the messages,
are agreed upon in advance. I'm sure you're dying to know how &mdash; 
simply turn the page to end the suspense.
