## High density surfaces (HiDPI)

In the past several years, a huge leap in pixel density in high-end displays has
been seen, new displays packing twice as many pixels into the same physical area
as we've seen in years past. We call these displays "HiDPI", short for "high
dots per inch". However, these displays are so far ahead of their "LoDPI" peers
that application-level changes are necessary to utilize them properly. By
doubling the screen resolution in the same space, we would halve the size of all
of our user interfaces if we lent them no special consideration. For most
displays, this would make the text unreadable and the interactive elements
uncomfortably small.

In exchange, however, we're offered a much greater amount of graphical fidelity
with our vector graphics, most notably with respect to text rendering. Wayland
addresses this by adding a "scale factor" to each output, and clients are
expected to apply this scale factor to their interfaces. Additionally, clients
which are unaware of HiDPI signal this limitation through inaction, allowing the
compositor to make up for it by scaling up their buffers. The compositor signals
the scale factor for each output via the appropriate event:

```
<interface name="wl_output" version="3">
  <!-- ... -->
  <event name="scale" since="2">
    <arg name="factor" type="int" />
  </event>
</interface>
```

Note that this was added in version 2, so when binding to the `wl_output` global
you must set the version to at least 2 to receive these events. This is *not*
enough to decide to use HiDPI in your clients, however. In order to make that
call, the compositor must also send `enter` events for your `wl_surface` to
indicate that it has "entered" (is being shown on) a particular output or
outputs:

```
<interface name="wl_surface" version="4">
  <!-- ... -->
  <event name="enter">
    <arg name="output" type="object" interface="wl_output" />
  </event>
</interface>
```

Once you know the collection of outputs a client is shown on, it should take the
maximum value of the scale factors, multiply the size (in pixels) of its buffers
by this value, then render the UI at 2x or 3x (or Nx) scale. Then, indicate the
scale the buffer was prepared at like so:

```
<interface name="wl_surface" version="4">
  <!-- ... -->
  <request name="set_buffer_scale" since="3">
    <arg name="scale" type="int" />
  </request>
</interface>
```

**Note**: this requires version 3 or newer of `wl_surface`. This is the version
number you should pass to the `wl_registry` when you bind to `wl_compositor`.

Upon the next `wl_surface.commit`, your surface will assume this scale factor.
If it's greater than the scale factor of an output the surface is shown on, the
compositor will scale it down. If it's less than the scale factor of an output,
the compositor will scale it up.
