# Seats: Handling input

Displaying your application to the user is only half of the I/O equation &mdash;
most applications also need to process input. For this purpose, the seat
provides an abstraction over input events on Wayland. In philosophical terms, a
Wayland seat refers to one "seat" at which a user sits and operates the
computer, and is associated with up to one keyboard and up to one "pointer"
device (i.e. a mouse or touchpad). A similar relationship is defined for
touchscreens, drawing tablet devices, and so on.

It's important to remember that this is an *abstraction*, and that the seats
represented on a Wayland display may not correspond 1:1 with reality. In
practice, it's rare for more than a single seat to be available on a Wayland
session. If you plug a second keyboard into your computer, it's generally
assigned to the same seat as the first, and the keyboard layout and so on are
dynamically switched as you start typing on each. These implementation details
are left to the Wayland compositor to consider.

From the client's perspective, it's reasonably straightforward. If you bind to
the `wl_seat` global, you get access to the following interface:

```xml
<interface name="wl_seat" version="7">
  <enum name="capability" bitfield="true">
    <entry name="pointer" value="1" />
    <entry name="keyboard" value="2" />
    <entry name="touch" value="4" />
  </enum>

  <event name="capabilities">
    <arg name="capabilities" type="uint" enum="capability" />
  </event>

  <event name="name" since="2">
    <arg name="name" type="string" />
  </event>

  <request name="get_pointer">
    <arg name="id" type="new_id" interface="wl_pointer" />
  </request>

  <request name="get_keyboard">
    <arg name="id" type="new_id" interface="wl_keyboard" />
  </request>

  <request name="get_touch">
    <arg name="id" type="new_id" interface="wl_touch" />
  </request>

  <request name="release" type="destructor" since="5" />
</interface>
```

**Note**: This interface has been updated many times &mdash; take note of the 
version when you bind to the global. This book assumes you're binding to the 
latest version, which is version 7 at the time of writing.

This interface is relatively straightforward. The server will send the client a
`capabilities` event to signal what kinds of input devices are supported by this
seat &mdash; represented by a bitfield of `capability` values &mdash; and the
client can bind to the input devices it wishes to use accordingly. For example,
if the server sends `capabilities` where<br />
`(caps & WL_SEAT_CAPABILITY_KEYBOARD) > 0` is true, the client may then use the
`get_keyboard` request to obtain a `wl_keyboard` object for this seat. The
semantics for each particular input device are covered in the remaining
chapters.

Before we get to those, let's cover some common semantics.

### Event serials

Some actions that a Wayland client may perform require a trivial form of
authentication in the form of input event serials. For example, a client which
opens a popup (a context menu summoned with a right click is one kind of popup)
may want to "grab" all input events server-side from the affected seat until the
popup is dismissed.  To prevent abuse of this feature, the server can assign
serials to each input event it sends, and require the client to include one of
these serials in the request.

When the server receives such a request, it looks up the input event associated
with the given serial and makes a judgement call. If the event was too long ago,
or for the wrong surface, or wasn't the right kind of event &mdash; for example,
it could reject grabs when you wiggle the mouse, but allow them when you click
&mdash; it can reject the request.

From the server's perspective, they can simply send a incrementing integer with
each input event, and record the serials which are considered valid for a
particular use-case for later validation. The client receives these serials from
their input event handlers, and can simply pass them back right away to perform
the desired action.

We'll discuss these in more detail in later chapters, when we start covering
the specific requests which require input event serials to validate them.

### Input frames

A single input event from an input device may be broken up into several Wayland
events for practical reasons. For example, a `wl_pointer` will emit an `axis`
event as you use the scroll wheel, but it will separately emit an event telling
you what *kind* of axis it was: scroll wheel, a finger on a touchpad, tilting
the scroll wheel to the side, etc. The same input event from the input source
may have also included some motion of the mouse, or the click of a button, if
the user did all of these things quickly enough.

The semantic grouping of these related events differs slightly from input type
to input type, but the `frame` event is generally common between them. In short,
if you buffer up all of the input events you receive from a device, then wait
for the `frame` event to signal that you've received all events for a single
input "frame", you can interpret the buffered up *Wayland* events as a single
*input* event, then reset the buffer and start collecting events for the next
frame.

If this sounds too complicated, don't sweat it. Many applications don't have to
worry about input frames. It's only when you start doing more complex input
event handling that you'll want to concern yourself with this.

### Releasing devices

When you're done using a device, each interface has a `release` request you can
use to clean it up. It'll look something like this:

```xml
<request name="release" type="destructor" />
```

Easy enough.
